Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lobs, and
today I'm joined by Rafael Ruiz. He's a philosophy
PhD student at the London School of Economics, and
today we're focusing mostly on his sub stack post
titled Being Woke Is Good Actually, and we're also
going to talk about moral progress. So Rafael, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, thank you, thank you so much. I'm, I'm
a really big fan of, of your, of your
podcast. I've been watching for years, so I'm really
excited to be here.
Well, thank you. So let's start with the definition
here. What does the term woke really mean? How
would you characterize it? I mean, also because I
wanted to ask you this question also, and I
think this is also something you will end up
addressing in your sub-stack post, but, uh, I mean,
the way we hear the term. B used particularly
by people on the right nowadays, I mean, it's
almost meaningless or it means something like, oh, anything
that is progressive or leftist something like that, and
it's used as a pejorative, right? So, but what
do you think it means?
Yeah, exactly. So I think it has two definitions
nowadays, um. The classic definition, let's say when it,
when the movement started about being woke, the idea
was being aware of injustice, and it came from
African-American slang, I would say, especially in the, in
the US and It became, it, you know, it
used to be being aware and attentive to social
facts, to social problems, especially having to do with
racial justice, and then it expanded also to questions
like feminism, right? But I think nowadays in the
current discussion. It has become this idea of, uh,
being liberal in a way that is considered unreasonable
or extreme or pandering to the left. So there's,
with, with many moral terms, we are always facing
this ideological battle, uh, between left and right to
try to appropriate terms, and this has happened. A
lot in in the last um 10 years or
so you can, you know, it, it used to
be called being a social justice warrior or being
politically correct or feminazi or virtue signaling or a
snowflake or identity politics. It has so many or
or being easily triggered. It it has so many,
um. Has gone so many changes and now woke
has become this casual term for, for this phenomenon,
uh, being fought in this ideological battle, and the
issue is this pushback and this reappropriation of the
term by the right as an insult as being
this group of people has gone too far over
this. Questions that to us are considered to be
trivial, that they are not, they are trivial grievances
and they are not where the real problems are,
and these people are just becoming too sensitive to
these issues.
Right, I, I mean, it's interesting that you mentioned
that that it sort of replaced terms like social
justice warrior because just the other day I was
thinking about that, that, I mean, we, uh, people
were using SJW and then all of a sudden
they shifted to woke and it means almost The
same thing with perhaps a couple of differences here
and there, but it's basically used to as a
pejorative against people who position themselves mostly as progressive
or on the left and care about social justice,
uh, justice issues, correct?
Yeah, exactly, um, I mean, if I go back
to the history of the term, even thinking about,
uh, through our lifetimes, I guess, uh, you can
see how this ideological battles used to go on
even in the, in the 2010s as like, if
you remember movements such as new atheism with Richard
Dawkins and how that movement kind of split, uh,
in, in. In this ideological fault lines, especially on
the Internet, about what do we think about issues
such as feminism or or racism or structural injustice,
um, I mean, I could go into detail about
this, uh, there was this, um. You know, there
was this whole Reddit movement, uh, and backlash against
people such as like Anita Sarkisian, who was very,
very famous in the 2010s, um, as like a
feminist critic of things like video games and, and
TV shows, and then there was this huge backlash
for people from people who put themselves as being
more rational. Than these angry feminists and then they
would take these clips of, of the feminists, um,
sometimes out of context or sometimes like they would
take a 5 minute video and I talk about
this in the blog post, take a 5 minute
video of the feminist and dissect it for like
an hour and of course if you do that,
um. Everyone can be made to look better when
you are able to do this very detailed takedown.
I think you could do that even with like
flat earthers. You could, if you were a flat
earther and you listen to a five minute speech
by by somebody who's a scientist, you could tear
down every little sentence and, and use almost like
rhetorical points to come out on top, even though,
um, you know, you're. Arguments might not be so
good, like, and, and they used to use all
these clickbait titles about feminists being destroyed with facts
and logic is the classic sort of Reddit movement,
uh, against and, and backlash against this kind of
feminism, and I think that has just kept growing
over the last 10 years or so. I think
there, there has been, well, this is very connected
to, to global politics, right? So, um. The politics
of Trump, Boris Johnson, Bolsonaro, all these people have
promoted this sort of anti-woke radicalization.
Mhm. No, I, I mean, I am definitely more
or less aware of what happened in the 2010s,
and I mean, for example, I'm an atheist, but
I've never been a very big fan of the
new atheist movement because the way that people like
Richard Dawkins and Sam Harris used uh approach or
used to approach topics like religion, I, I mean,
it's so, it's just oversimplistic and when I have
conversations with on the show and even before I
started the show. With cognitive scientists of religion, anthropologists
of religion, and other people like that, I mean,
they never talk about religion that way, the sort
of approach that the new atheists has tended to
have to religion, I would even consider it to
be anti-scientific because it's just calling people stupid or
dumb or saying that they believe in imaginary friends
or whatever, something like that, so just, uh, overly
simplistic, and then, yeah, uh, there. There was that
sort of movement in the late 2000s, early 2010s
where people started to identify themselves on the internet
and on YouTube as skeptics influenced by the new
atheists and then they got into uh anti-feminism because
they thought that they thought that uh anti, they
thought that feminism was equivalent rationally speaking to being
religious or something. Something like that and so they
sort of equated the two things and I, I'm
not saying here that for example I agree specifically
with the takes by people like Anita Sarkisian, but
feminism is much broader than that and much more
complex and uh usually tends to tackle real issues
and not the sort of clickbaity things like you
mentioned there that people put uh circulating on the
internet. Uh-huh.
Yeah, I mean, um, speaking even from my own
life experience, I guess, uh, as a teenager, I
was kind of influenced by this whole, um, new
atheism movement, so I remember this quite well, and
it, it took effort and, like, being a bit
shook by my friends. And and people I knew
about the fact that I was absorbing all these
anti-social justice warrior rhetoric and buying into this ideology,
um, there's some people refer to this as the,
as the alt-right funnel, uh, there's, there's this. Firms
that you know that they, they might look good
from a distance and they might have some clips
that seem pretty reasonable, but then over, over a
period of time you might get lured into more
and more extreme versions of, of the same claims
and um once you have like become part of,
of a group it's really hard to sort of
exit that. Echo chamber. So, and I mean, I,
I, it's not that I want to say this
is only for, for the right wing. We, um,
I guess we'll get into this later. I think
there's, there are some problems also with the woke
movement and, and echo chambers, but I think especially
nowadays we are suffering this more on the, on
the right, on especially the extreme right side of
things.
OK, so one of the things that you also
tackle in your post has to do with emotion
or resorting to emotions like anger and irritation in
the face of injustice, and that's also something that
we tend to hear from right-wing people, all those
woke people. They are just angry, they're just irritated,
they're not reasonable. I mean, but, but don't you
think that perhaps there are at least some instances
where expressing anger or even being angry and irritated
is justified in the face of injustice?
Yeah, exactly. So, um, I actually got to learn
more about this now that I'm teaching political philosophy
at university and I have to tackle some of
the contemporary authors writing about this, and, uh, on
this part of the article, I, I was thinking
about Amy Arinivasan's article, um, on, uh, affective injustice.
The idea would be that. Keeping perfectly calm under
a situation where it seems appropriate to get angry
is a form of, of injustice. It is not
a large form of injustice, uh, as compared to
like physical violence, for example, but. There's this idea,
try to and I, I put this analogy of
like try to imagine like you had a friend
who is being beaten up by the police and
you just have to keep calm because if you
get too angry at, at the police that are
beating your friend, um, you might lose your standing
as as somebody who's who's being rational in that
situation you might be taken to be rational or
or or be detained by the police as well,
um. The problem there is that you have to
bottle up that anger in order to be considered
rational in and, and as part of civil society.
Forcing victims of injustice or or friends of victims
of injustice to bottle up that justified, it seems
like morally justified anger. So in a way what
Srinivasan wants to say is that it seems to
be almost like a form of victim blaming. It
seems to be blaming the victims of this injustice
and forcing them. To, to behave in in ways
that are, um, purely uh rational or or calm
suppressing that anger to appeal reasonable in the in
cases of, of, um, and this to transpose into
the woke case right in in cases of racial
injustice, in case of uh misogyny, uh, or, or
some kind of, uh, aggression here. And I also
think we sometimes, you know, and this maybe not
so much with the new atheism movement, but especially
with the anti-woke, um, it is quite ironic that
I actually think that the anti-woke tend to be
quite, uh, emotional, uh, in their, in their movement.
So they're pushed back against, against the woke, uh,
by. You know, tends, tends to also fall for
this, uh, bandwagon effects and tends to also suffer
from this emotional outbursts. So it's not like, you
know, it used to be more understandable when he
was like this classical liberal who was very detached.
From the issues of structural injustice, arguing against the
woke as it was like 10 years ago, but
now that is woke versus anti-woke, it seems like
both sides are pretty clearly expressing a lot of
emotion in the political discourse. So I see, you
know, quite a big change here over the last
years.
Yeah, and in the, in your post you use
the term anti-woke radicalization. What is that? I mean,
what do you mean by radicalization in that instance?
Yeah, so I'm thinking of that funnel that um
the right kind of pushes people through, um, there,
there was this post by Andy Masley on, on
Substack as well around the same time as mine,
and he says that we have this tendency to,
um, fall prey to. When, whenever we don't like
something to fall prey into falling into the opposite
ideology, um, and that doesn't, it's, it's not necessarily,
uh, a rational thing to do. If you're exposed
to a lot of, um, versions of one ideology
that you don't feel is very compelling. Immediately falling
for the opposite ideology is not particularly rational. Um,
SO, in a way, we end up falling for
this, um. Mm, you, you know, radicalization to the
other side that isn't particularly rational either. Uh, IN,
in any case, it would lead us to be
skeptics of both sides, and, and we can also
discuss this, uh, as well, like the idea of
like, maybe we shouldn't be woke or anti-woke, which
is what a lot. Of the feedback that I
got on my post was about, um, but yeah,
I think there's this, mm, because of the fact
that people got exposed to a lot of woke,
mm, ideology or, or woke claims, they just try
to adopt the thing as far as possible from
the woke. Which doesn't make it rational. And now
that we are seeing maybe some of the anti-woke
things, we might become again like negatively polarized to
become woke again. I think that this is the,
when people talk about the pendulum of politics going
back and forth. Uh, SOMETIMES it's not because we
find an ideology, ideology that we really like that
we follow that ideology. It is more a backlash
against the current ideology and, and our distaste for
the current excesses of that ideology.
Uh, DO you think that, uh, anti-woke people are
defending the status quo, I mean, in any way?
Right. Um, SO, I think, yeah, in, in some
regards, they are. Um, SO, a lot of people,
when, even when they study, um, politics or political
philosophy, they might get up to, you know, the
1970s with, uh, the theories as like John. Roles
which only talks about the distribution of wealth in
a society, but there have been quite a lot
of innovations and I would recommend some people to
read, uh, more contemporary, I guess, more contemporary authors
that I draw from in my, in my work,
uh, because a lot of, lots of worries that
have to do with political philosophy are not about
the distribution of resources or wealth or taxation. Um,
BUT about more issues that might have to do
more with identity, for example, um. And How we
should try to minimize some injustices that might happen,
for example, inside the family, which is where a
lot of feminists kind of thrive in their critique,
saying like the liberal status quo only analyzes how
individuals. SHOULD act with regards to the state, but
they don't really talk about almost at all about
how the distribution of power should happen within or
inside the family. Um, SO in that regard I,
I do think we have this, um. Uh, COMPLACENCY
and especially now that we have this, some people
have called it vice signaling instead of, um, instead
of, uh, virtue signaling, which is what we had
some years ago about trying to be as pure
as, as leftist as possible to win in, in
discussions we now. I see a lot of trying
to project the most vices or trying to bully
people into submission like you might have seen that
video of that AI video of Donald Trump, uh,
like pooping on, on, on top of protesters and,
and that kind of thing which is really like
it is signaling lots of vices in a way
into, into the wider population. And, or like how
in, in the internet you get to see a
lot of like, how people want to be uh
chats or based or alpha against like the, the
other side who is seen as, as weak, right?
So I do think that if we don't look
at that from the point of view of political
philosophy and from the point of view of egalitarianism,
for example, and we just try to project this
idea. Of power and, and having other people submit
to how great we are, of how, how based
we are in our claims, how the others are
just being weak because they are egalitarian, we might
enter a really worrying tendency, I think, in, in
many of our Western countries that might lead to
a deterioration of many important democratic values, but also.
Uh, YOU know, basic levels of equality between people
who might belong to different social classes, to different
genders, to different races, all of that might potentially
be undermined in the long term if we don't
take measures to prevent this kind of values from
spreading.
So would you say that the values espoused by
woke people are morally good?
So, I think so, at least on first approach.
Um, SO, I think the woke values originally came
from this, uh, 1968, um, revolts, the student revolts,
um, and a growing concern about many other issues
that went beyond, uh, just liberal values. And I
do think it takes, for example, uh, some level
of moral courage to, especially in the current climate,
to put forward these values. Now, um, it is
tricky because I would I would say that we
also, there are also some problems of, of echo
chambers of and so mainly the problems are not
so much moral problems, so I think the woke
fundamentally more or less have good moral values about,
about equality, about trying to reduce this structural injustices,
trying to think our current society has a long
history of. Things being pretty unfair and we should
attempt to remedy these issues, but. The problem is
more epistemic. I think people might not understand what's
the best way of, of tackling these issues, and
especially when, when people enter these echo chambers nowadays
with the internet, right, um, that reinforce ideologies in
these very simple ways and people fall for these
purity tests where like the best woke person is
the one who is the the best leftist radical.
Um, I, I don't think that's a good way
to go for the woke movement. So, I think
the values are good, but maybe the, the epistemic
values that are being cultivated because it's such an
online thing and it happens so much online rather
than in other areas of life is problematic.
Uh, SO give us perhaps some examples of how
wokeism can go too far.
Yeah, so, I mean, I spend a lot of
time seeing this almost like culture wars which used
to take place on Twitter and now that it's
split into, into Blue Sky and versus Twitter, um,
you see these echo chambers in, in both directions
in the, in the right, like you can almost
like choose your, your, your social media platform. You
can choose the, the leftist blue sky or, or,
or the modern X which, you know, in, depending
on which you go to, you might face these
echo chambers, um, that are really, really bad, uh,
I think it, it can lead to, um, So
in the, in the woke movement, it would lead
to this purity testing of people, so that you
have to be better and more woke than the
people around you and That radicalizes people into um
espousing slogans, I think that are unsustainable, like you
might think of the whole defund the police movement
and the more you think or the more you
think about that, um, I think, uh, it's, it's
just a bad slogan probably because you don't really
want to be defending the police, then what would
happen if a if a crime were to happen,
right? Uh, SO. Because of the use of slogans
in online discussion, I think, mm. There's this really
corrupting kind of phenomenon that happens a lot in,
in social media. And I, I do have another
blog post that talks about why we shouldn't use
slogans or, or analogies so much when thinking about
political problems because I think they can be greatly
misleading. So, while I see the, the value of
like gathering people around the slogan. Um, THERE can
be a lot of harm actually coming from that
because that's not the ultimate goal and also you
are alienating people who might be more moderate into
your movement, so like people who might not accept
the idea of defund the police or recently you
hear the slogan of from the river to the
sea in the protest about Palestine and Israel and
The underlying idea there is that um Palestine should
be the only owner of that of, of that
section of land and and Israel should not own
anything, uh, and then you have the worry, well,
what would happen, uh, what, what then after if,
if those slogans were to become a reality. So
sometimes we espouse these slogans. And we either, if
we are reasonable, we either want to say, no,
actually I, I'm saying this, but I don't mean
it, which, you know, at, at that point, like
why are you espousing the slogan in the first
place because you're also alienating a lot of people
who don't really believe that that slogan or you're
only appealing to people with very extreme beliefs, uh,
or people who might have a very short term
look at political issues like it's not that. The
world ends after you, you have your victory in
politics, after your party wins or anything like that.
The world has to continue and Um, it's just,
it's gonna be difficult to actually, uh, engage with
this new politics, uh, when, when that, that slogan
is being implemented into policy.
Right, so, uh, I mean, this is something that
you also work on. What is non-deal moral theory
and how does it apply to these discussions surrounding
wokeism?
Yeah, so on this point, I draw from the
philosophy of Charles Mills. Uh, WHO kind of challenges
the political philosophy of John Rawl's, uh, idealized, uh,
social contract. So ideal political philosophy and ideal moral
theory is the idea that once you set up
the correct moral values, everyone in society immediately complies
with those values, immediately obeys the correct values, and
Well, That is problematic first of all because that's
not really uh applicable to, to reality and uh
Charles Mills focuses a lot on the idea that
um the social contract has been used to. Um,
OPPRESS and, and to kind of ignore many of,
of these problems, make, um. Makes many social problems
that don't have to deal with, with the contract
itself, uh, invisible, first of all, but also, um,
originally when John Locke were, were draft and, and
people in the, in the Enlightenment were drafting these
social contracts, they might write about the quality of
all people yet own slaves, for example, at the
same time. So those, even those social contracts were
uh problematic. But also, mm, as people like, uh,
Iris Mayor Young have pointed out, there are different
levels of oppression, such as exploitation, marginalization, powerlessness, um,
forms of violence that are really not captured by
this, uh, idealized social contract. Um, AND also, like,
even if we were to find out the ideal
values. If we failed partly to comply with them,
that would, could yield a worse society than if
we were to just focus on non-deal theory, which
is another worry that that is known as the
as the theory of the second best in, in
economics, and it's basically just to put a simple
example. Imagine the ideal society were to have two
different values, uh, this ideal distribution of resources and,
uh, a defense of, of property rights. Um, AND
you might think, OK, well, the, what we have
to do in political philosophy is to try to
approach that ideal, and this is how Ross thinks
about things. You just have to get as close
as possible to that ideal. Well, Imagine we can
fulfill the, what we desire in terms of, of,
um, property rights, but we cannot achieve the distribution.
That could be a worse result than even like
the current status quo, uh, just because it reinforces,
um, the, the situation, and it could be, it,
it could be definitely worse than a a situation
of a completely different political arrangement that doesn't really
reinforce just one of the elements and fails and
at another one. SO actually what these people want
to say is that. Like there's almost no point
to doing um ideal theory because as long as
not all the conditions are met, then we would,
we could be falling into a worse situation than
we could be doing if we started thinking of
politics from the here and the now and the
problems that we currently have instead of trying to
think of this realistic utopia project that Ross is
thinking about.
Right, I understand. So let's talk now a bit
about moral progress and then also try to link
it to wokism. So, first of all, what is
moral progress? How do you approach it?
Right, so actually the definition of moral progress is
not so difficult, but the problems arises when you
want to actually come up with a concrete theory
or conception. So moral progress just means that, um,
a society or an individual or humanity is moving
morally in a better direction, but that doesn't say
anything without providing, um, a full theory of it,
but The way that, you know, we, the people
that work on this topic, think about it is
we have at least some paradigmatic cases that most
reasonable people think are moral progress, such as the
abolition of slavery. Uh, THE extension of legal rights
to women, uh, universal suffrage, uh, ending the criminalization
of homosexuality, and a lot of people, Alan Buchanan,
uh, Philip Kitcher, Hanno Sauer, people who have, you
have interviewed in the past actually, um, yes,
Hano Sauer and, uh, Alan Buchanan, yes, yeah.
Have, um, talked about, about many of, of these,
um, of these things, and the core for many
of these people is this idea of expanding the
moral circle to include more, more beings over time.
So there's this historical trajectory which is not as
simple as people want to, to put forward, of
course, like there's no linearity to history. There are
always many setbacks. But at least in, in the
process of modernity, there have been these expansions of
the moral circle that I have mentioned about the
abolition of slavery, about the growth of democracy in
the world, um, considering interracial marriage to not be
morally problematic, considering homosexuality to not be morally problematic,
um. But of course, also this idea of moral
inclusion might be too narrow to capture all the
cases of, of moral progress. So there may be
other situations, uh, that we might want to consider
moral progress that are not just reducible to, to
this theory, but I guess that's the core theory
that has been developed until now.
Yeah, and there are different approaches to moral progress.
There are, for example, psychological theories of moral progress,
materialist theories of moral progress. Let me ask you
first about the psychological theories, that the ones that
tend to be based on or focused on improvements
in moral reasoning or expansions of empathy. Uh, WHAT
do you think about that kind of theories?
Yeah, so, I think they are, they are an
important component, but I think they, they are also
somewhat incomplete. In, in the sense of, so when
you read people like Peter Singer, uh, Steven Pinker,
um, they might appeal to phenomenons such as the,
you know, after we undergo this process of, of
growing empathy in modernity, um, because maybe we interact
with more foreigners in, in modern societies than we
did in the past. And we also start listening
to some uh arguments about there not being morally
relevant differences between people in different countries that might
lead to a process of moral consistency reasoning, so
treating cases that we recognize as being the same
equally, um. It, it leads to this process where
rationally we would be compelled to, to act in
ways that we treat two agents equally because we
don't see those morally relevant differences. So the, the
cases would be sexism or. Racism, uh, but also
speciesism, for example, more, more recently, Peter Singer, who
has developed this theory of the expanding circle, also
wants to expand the circle to animals and, and
think that the species is, is not a morally
relevant characteristic. Um, THE problem that I see with
these theories, I guess, and this leads to, to
the second part of the discussion, more about more
materialistic theories of moral progress is that I don't
think. Well, we don't have enough empirical research about
this, but also like the empirical research. Um, DOESN'T
seem to be very robust. Like you might have
seen some articles by Singer and Swiss Gebel talking
about how when people go to an ethics class,
they are more willing to eat vegan or vegetarian
after, after an ethics class, but the, the difference
might be like 10 or 20% compared to, to
the, to an alternative group. And I don't think
this is also a good explanation for why did
so much moral progress happen, I guess, together, uh,
clustered in this process of, of modernity and enlightenment.
Like, it doesn't seem so plausible to me since
our biological capacities for reasoning or emotion haven't changed
very radically, um. It doesn't seem so plausible to
me that this is the correct explanation, and we
need to supplement the explanation with, with something else.
OK, and then what do you think about uh
materialist theories of moral progress? And I know that
you are interested in, for example, linking them to
work in cultural evolution done by people like Joseph
Erich, Peter Richardson, Robert Boyd. I've had them all
on the show and big trends in human history,
like for example, the theory of uh by Ian
Morris on the history of human values as well
as Michael Muthu Krishna, I mean, I've, I've also
had him on the show and Vaclav S Mill's,
uh, approach to energy capture and how it leads
to different types of hierarchy. So tell us about
all of that.
Yeah, so. I mean, I want to replace the
traditional psychologistic picture that I guess Singer is putting
forward about empathy and reason being the main drivers
of moral progress and move towards a more materialist
understanding in order to explain why so many. So
many morally progressive changes happen in such a relatively
short period of time and, and clustered together around
the 18th century until now. Um. And I think
that's so, and, and when I say materialism, a
lot of people tend to think of, of, um,
you know, the Marxist theory of historical materialism, but
that is not necessarily the case. What I would
say is that we should keep the framework of
materialism and say that material change. WHERE the most
important thing, the most important factor for, for this,
uh, changes in, in ideology, but we can understand
materialism in a, in a very broad way. So,
just to go from the, I guess, maybe the
most abstract to the more concrete. So, for example,
Morris and Smil talk a lot about how energy
capture over history has changed the hierarchies of, of
the societies that we might have had. So, When
we were hunter gatherers, we might have had some
level of tribal egalitarianism, and, but when we established
agriculture that led to a division of labor and,
and in, in a division of society into different
classes or, or castes, um. Of like priests and
kings and, um, you know, uh, people in agriculture,
people doing pottery, like different, different levels and, and
a sort of level of hierarchy. And now that
we are I think one of the most impactful
changes has been since the industrial revolution that what
happened was when we entered the industrial revolution, we
had this movement of social classes from this rigidly
hierarchical, almost like feudal societies or at least aristocratic
of the ancient regime. Into a movement on a,
on a growth of a bourgeois class at least,
um, then eventually it led to the development of
a middle class, but in the beginning it was
this development of a bourgeois class at the top,
but that challenged the traditional ways that societies were
arranged, which led to a move towards more egalitarian
values and, and values of like recognition. Um, DEMOCRATIC
recognition for people across society, and I think that,
so that movement of. Um, OF energy capture leads
to renewed ideas and renewed institutions, basically. Uh, SO
in terms of ideas, it also happens because of
the development of new technologies. So, so that is
why the, the materialist theory can be quite broad
because, um, even new technologies such as the printing
press have had a great impact on how the
new classes could organize themselves in. Due to the
printing press, there was this development of an academy
of letters that was able to write, you know,
people from France and people from England and from
other countries were able to develop this enlightenment period.
Um, BY being able to communicate scientific discoveries, but
also importantly radical moral ideas for their time, so
they would also be organizing new social arrangements and
thinking how can we change, uh, our, our current
societies, which led to a change eventually of how
institutions were shaped around society basically. And those institutions
um were able to be much more democratic than
than in the past, especially when we transcended that
fight or that uh scramble for zero-sum scramble for
resources that we might have faced in the past
of, uh, a very low level of living where.
We had enough to eat basically, but we didn't
have a substantial amount of economic growth. I think
what happened with the industrial revolution, even though in
the beginning it was not a very high level
of growth, I think it was around 2%, um.
But that 2% growth compounding year after year, uh,
really led to a great amount of, uh, energy,
energy capture and that reform our institutions, but also
reform our moral psychology when people are in a
zero-sum competition for, for the very basic resources such
as food and shelter, and they might be forced
to pillage, plunder, uh, enter war with other nations.
As opposed to having much more peaceful behavior in
general, so there was all these pressures that all
of a sudden, um, Became much less pressing in
terms of material conditions and that led to a
very changed psychological makeup for people living in in
modern societies, but also really changed institutions who for
the first time they were much more representative of
um of their people and much more egalitarian.
So do you think then that the materialist approach
to moral progress has more explanatory power than psychological
approach?
I think so. Um, I think there's a gap
in the, in the psychological approach in trying to
explain why moral progress happened when it did. Um,
THEY could be alternative explanations. I'm not saying. You
know, people could say, well, given your, what you
have said about the Academy of Letters and that
people could communicate with each other, there was this
spread of ideas, um, that led to, to this
psychological and, and arguments being shared across people in
different countries, but I don't think that by itself
was enough to, to lead us to. To this
push for moral progress. So I do think we
are still um We, we still need the material
conditions to change in a substantial way because, well,
there, there have been, um, some, uh, aristocrat classes
or, or people in churches who were always able
to, to communicate with each other, uh, but still
I don't think the material conditions were there in
order to reach this more universal push for different
values.
Right, so one last question then, uh, do you
think that moral progress links to being woke, and
if so, how?
Right, so I think woke could be seen as,
well, being morally progressive, right, at least in the
positive, uh, sense of the term, which is having
greater, um, greater attention for justice, equality, inclusion, which
are parts of what moral progress consists in, uh.
And especially when we link it to a materialist
approach, um, we might see that many of the
injustices that happen in the world might be more
structural than just simply conscious. It's, it's not that
people might have bad intentions all the time, but
it's simply that we are socialized in particular ways
to. Um, THAT leads us to behave in, in,
in society in, in such ways, and also we
come from this background, if you listen to like
evolutionary evolutionary psychology of nepotism of favoring um us
versus uh having a a wider um scope for
moral concern, so we, if we are able to
combine. Uh, YOU know, uh, a flourishing material conditions
with, uh, good ideologies that might reduce levels of
racism, sexism, transphobia, classism, um, even correcting for some
colonial wrongs that might have happened in the past,
like you might worry that, you know, people still
in many countries are being benefited by colonial wrongs
that happened a long time ago. And people have
not done anything about them, and we are still
suffering from, and people in many countries are suffering
from a situation of just being unlucky and that
they were born in a country that is really
poor, as opposed to being born in a country
with a privilege of um. I guess, being in
a better economic and social situation, right? Um, SO.
There is a combination, I guess, of the, of,
of moral progress with wokeness here and I guess
wokeness is, is one step of it, um, but
I would also push people who are woke to
pay attention to, um, the prioritization of different, uh,
areas where, where they want to. Uh, PUSH for,
for more justice. So in order to not just
be aspirational, maybe we should try to put our
efforts where we see that they might matter most,
and that might not be so intuitive. So I
mean I am. In a way, uh, interacting with
different, uh, parts of, of, um, political philosophy, uh,
but also leftist movements, but also the effective altruism
movement. So I guess I would want them to
learn some things from each other. So I would
like the world to learn about the ideas of
like, how can we become more effective, and at
the same time, I, I guess I would like
Uh, some of the effective altruism people to look
more at the structural or, or material causes that,
that shape our current societies. So. I guess I
would push for people to take the good aspects
of being woke, that commitment to social justice, but
also learn how to prioritize it better, to be,
um, I guess, numerically informed in such that we
might worry about the biggest issues in ways that
are proportional for how much they matter. Um, SO
I guess that would be, to me, that would
be the ideal evolution of the, of, of moral
progress and, and, and of the, I guess, the
woke movement.
Great, so where can people find you and your
work on the internet?
So they can follow me on Twitter at Rafael
Ruis Delia. Uh, I also have a website, Rafael
Ruis Delia.com. They can find me, I guess, at
the LSC philosophy website or at Field people, the
field papers website, which, uh, many philosophers publish the
papers they might publish there, um, in order to
kind of keep in touch with my future papers,
I might write and hopefully an upcoming book in
the In the following years about the philosophy of
moral progress, and they can also follow me on
the, on my sub stack, the moral circle.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been great
to talk with you.
It, it's been great, Ricardo. uh THANK you very
much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wiseman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate von Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes
Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.